[Music]
welcome to topcast episode
one of an entirely new series on the
science of
can and can't by kiara marletta now i
did say towards the end of the beginning
of infinity series which i haven't quite
finished yet
i said that the only thing that could
dissuade me really
from my next project being an
exploration of the fabric of reality
david deutscher's the first book
would be if david published something
brand new
and that didn't quite happen what
happened instead is that david's
colleague
chiara marletto has published an
absolutely astonishing book
about constructor theory called the
science of canon can't
and it was so interesting inspiring
original groundbreaking that
i couldn't let the opportunity pass
without doing a series on
this book alongside the fabric of
reality i think it'd be really
interesting to compare
how some of these ideas have evolved
over the last
few decades because certainly the seeds
of the thinking of constructive theory
are there
in the fabric of reality in in a certain
form
as i've been doing this podcast top cast
i have had messages over the months and
years now that i've been speaking about
these topics
i've had requests for particular
episodes
could you do an episode on this or that
possibly one of the most frequent
requests
i get is could you do something on
constructor theory and and to be honest
i have really wanted to do exactly that
have an episode or even
an entire series on constructive theory
but it has always seemed to me
to be too high a mountain to climb for
myself
there is a risk with any new theory like
this is simply not doing it justice or
in fact making egregious errors perhaps
dumbing it down a little bit too much
patronizing the audience or perhaps
going in the other direction and getting
too technical and perhaps making it too
boring
and getting away from what i really want
to do here which is i hope
make something both as clear as possible
in such a way that i think that i
personally come to a deeper
understanding of it
as well as at the same time being
actually faithful to the
truth of the actual explanations without
denuding any of the ideas
of their explanatory power so it's a
fine line
at times in trying to communicate any
area of science but in particular a
brand new fundamental
theory of physics if i was to cleave
more towards the highly technical then
the audience would probably become
a little smaller but the entirely broad
brushstrokes mean you're not going to
get the accuracy and precision that i
think is needed
and so so take it all together i
kind of thought that constructor theory
for me
seemed like too big of an ask until
now chiara maletto has managed to
provide with her book here
something that is made for export to
different kinds of media like this one
for example
and and what i love is it begins with a
lot of what we
already know peppered with the spice of
some cleverly new
deep insights and big claims that make
it really exciting
and then it begins to dive into what can
only be described as
revolution now i of course use that word
advisedly i'm not
big on thinking that someone like thomas
kuhn was correct
that their the history of science is
about the history of
scientific revolution the overturning
utterly of
other ideas in fact when you look and
analyze the history of science what you
find
is in fact anything that is described as
revolutionary
turns out on closer inspection to be an
incremental difference from
what had existed before but sometimes
that incremental difference
is highly creative and it seems like it
is a complete overturning of what went
before
but usually new theories contained
within them
as a subset or at least are predicated
upon
ideas that preceded them this is not to
deny
the great person vision of science i am
very much a subscriber that
to the idea that we need to have
iconoclastic physicists
working against the grain that the
history of science
has been people who are what we would
call
geniuses it doesn't mean that none of us
can learn what those
people have done or even accomplish what
those people have done but what it means
is
some people are able to think outside
the box and think of something creative
something new
and often this has been called a
revolution in science when someone does
think of something
genuinely new so so the these
traditional
ideas about scientific revolution
whether they are the copernican
revolution the darwinian revolution
ideas about continental drift and
geology and so on believe it or not that
is regarded as a revolutionary and one
of the more recent
scientific discoveries actually
these things are kind of incrementally
better than what went before it's just
that sometimes the increment might be a
little bit
bigger now here
in caramelitas the science of canon
can't we are indeed getting a theory
that is as big a jump as any of those
that i mentioned
the copernican revolution the darwinian
revolution the the big bang revolution
uh
einstein's relativity revolution all of
these things construct a theory
really is on a par with those kind of
things
but at the same time there's an
incremental aspect to it it does
come out of it does if it's an evolution
or a generalization as david deutch
might say
of the theory of computation the theory
of quantum computation it takes this
generalized it goes further with it and
then
probes areas of science that hear the
two
physics hasn't had much contact with
for example biology there is i i didn't
in fact do myself
biophysics at university but this is a
different way of approaching that
and even more exciting it brings
epistemology epistemology
to some extent within the purview of
physics it's as if we have a
physics of knowledge creation the
nascent beginnings of the physics of
knowledge creation here and this is why
i'm
particularly excited about this theory
in physics it's really it's deeper than
just a theory of physics
it is a theory of science this is why
the title of the book is the
science of canon can't rather than
merely the physics of canon can't
so the fact that the fact that this new
theory
reaches into physics it reaches into
computation which is already a part of
physics anyway biology
perhaps astonishingly into art and we're
going to
hear about that in this episode it's it
is
it has something to say about literature
to mythology we'll come to that
so it's absolutely an amazing book it
reads
as if it belongs in that great lineage
of books that began with the fabric of
reality
and it's now presenting for the lay
reader an entirely new mode
as we say of explanation a new way
of conceiving how to do physics from the
ground up so that's quite the task
that kiara has set herself for a popular
audience book
but of course just as with the beginning
of infinity it's
really not just a popular science book
it is that
but more like for example up here on my
shelf sits
the goldilocks enigma there by paul
davies
and that's in fact mentioned in the the
science of canon can't
the goldilocks enigma really is a
popular science book
a typical popular science book i don't
want to denigrate it in any way at all
it is a wonderful overview of
the fine-tuning problem which requires
it to summarise
what we either to know about aspects of
physics chemistry and biology and that's
a wonderful absolutely wonderful i
encourage people to read
popular science books like that but i'm
just mentioning in order to contrast it
with a
book like this or a book like the
beginning of infinity of course because
this book like the fabric of reality
like the beginning of infinity in the
main is
is not in the main discussing
the well-established well-known areas of
science that
kind of already appear in standard high
school
undergraduate textbooks by putting a
little spin on the top a little bit of
icing on the cake a little bit of
philosophical significance to these
well-established scientific ideas
instead this is new stuff this is
a new theory which has been published
out there in refereed journals of course
but is now for the first time really
being brought to a general audience
in book form there are lots of resources
out there on the constructortheory.org
website lots of talks for people who are
new to this
but this is the first time in one place
we have
a whole bunch of that very latest
research synthesized
into a single volume and
personally in the book what i've so far
found is truly intriguing and
we'll get we'll get to this today in
this episode how in physics the denial
of the possibility of considering
counter factuals
means that physics cannot possibly tell
anything like a complete
story of reality in its present form
now i emphasized the word story as you
will come to see and there's a clue
on the cover at least the the the
australian cover the kindle version
about this story just as i i mentioned
literature earlier
what on earth could literature have to
do with physics we
will see explanations really to be
explanations that allow us to understand
what's happening in the world
need to consider what else could have
happened in the world aside from what
will happen or what does happen in the
world so explanations
to be complete explanations fundamental
explanations
need to consider counterfactuals what
could have been
and so like i say one of the astonishing
parts here is that we will see this
comes to bear on
literature on things like myth and
fiction but also history for the same
reasons
as essentially this theory works in
science in constructive theory we can
seemingly
do away also entirely with the notion
therefore
of probability in physics instead if
there is a law of physics prohibiting
something
then it's an impossible task and that's
that
but if it's possible this means there is
no such law of physics and there is a
constructor that
could cause it to occur so i really
should start
the book there's going to be a lot that
i'm going
to skip um but i but i will begin i will
begin by reading
the forward of the book by david deutch
because
no i'm not no i'm not going to do that
because i want you to go and
buy the book i want you to go and
actually get the book you can get the
ebook
now as of this is may the 4th i'm
recording this which is the day the book
is released i presume this episode of
mine will be
out on the 5th of may broadly speaking
around the world depending upon your
time zone
but the so the actual the actual hard
cover version the book doesn't come out
until august i don't think but i'm going
to be uh
careful careful with the passages that i
read from the book because i don't want
to
think that anyone doesn't need to buy
the book that you can just
listen to my podcast and get a good
understanding of it i don't think that's
the case
and i want to leave a whole bunch of
gems that are in the book
in the book again to encourage people
it's not it's not an expensive book by
any stretch of the imagination if you go
to kindle
you can get it for a very reasonable
price at the moment
but there is a there is a section there
at the beginning goes for a number of
pages which is a forward by david
deutsch which is of course
worth the price of the book alone but
you're going to get a lot more than that
now also right at the beginning of the
book after the forward
comes a a note on how to read the book
i'm not going to read that
either and there is also a bit of a
prelude and i won't read
most of the prelude but it is where i'll
begin i'll just read a
a very small percentage of it about ten
percent of that prelia just one
section of it that's where i'm going to
begin
the book is also interesting for the
fact that it is chapters
on the hard rigorous science i
interspersed with interesting little
stories
which really bring in many ways the
wonder of physics back and that is
another reason i'm excited about this
book
being someone who was trained in physics
at the undergraduate level and to a
lesser extent
at the graduate level i went through the
emotions
of being excited inspired and
at times let down or disillusioned with
the project of doing physics
and i had to keep finding motivation by
finding new and interesting topics
within
physics to try and understand to try and
do and
this is one of those areas this
constructor theory is one of those areas
which is just so
new fresh exciting and seems to show
a lot of promise and that's another
reason that i'm doing this it's not
merely because
there is this close association between
the work of chiara maletto in the work
of david deutsch it's not only that
but because this particular theory
of physics is as exciting as any other
area of physics out there
areas of physics and cosmology about the
fine-tuning problem for example this
will have something to say about that
how how how physics might be able to
find a resolution to this question about
what is deeper
quantum theory or general relativity
and and this will have something to say
about that as well
it might have something to say about why
why string theory has
so far not borne too much fruit in
science
as much as it might be useful in
mathematics that there are just so many
avenues of promise that a person is
interested in physics can find
a real thrill in not least of which is
the derivation
of the laws of thermodynamics from
deeper
principles bringing the laws of
thermodynamics
into fundamental physics as well as
being emergent laws they can be
now talked about as being just as
fundamental as anything else and the
reasons for that
can be given through a constructor
theoretic
lens so all of this is just really
exciting stuff for anyone interested in
and
well and of course the the epistemology
stuff that i said you know that we could
have
a physics of epistemology of physics a
physics of
testability for example we're going to
get there we're going to get there
throughout the course of reading through
this book which i imagine
will take some months and it will happen
alongside
a series on the fabric of reality as
well as i
finally tie up the beginning of infinity
we can go
back in time to where the beginning of
infinity was inspired from the fabric of
reality
and forward to where the beginning of
infinity is leading to
to the science of can and can't so let
me begin and i'm beginning
on page xix because not quite at page
one yet so this is still
in the prelude okay so for the first of
what i presume will be
many many times i'm going to say and
chiara writes
the assumption that all fundamental
explanations in science
must be expressed only in terms of what
happens
with little or no reference to
counterfactuals is now getting in the
way of
progress for counterfactuals are
essential to a number of things that are
currently explained only vaguely in
science
or not explained at all counterfactuals
are central to an exact
unified theory of heat work and
information both classical and quantum
to explain matters such as the
appearance of design in living things
and to a scientific explanation of
knowledge
as i shall explain in this book some of
these things such as information heat
and work already have some explanation
in physics
but it is insufficient it is only
approximate unlike more fundamental
theories of physics such as
quantum theory and general relativity
some others such as knowledge creation
do not even have a fully fledged
explanation yet
all these entities must be understood
without approximations
for science to make new progress in all
sorts of fields
from fundamental physics to biology
computer science and even artificial
intelligence
counterfactuals are essential to
understand them all
pausing their just my unpacking of that
a little because
what are counterfactuals we haven't yet
been given an explanation of what they
are not by me in the book you do get one
so when i first heard about constructor
theory and i heard that it was and i
began to understand that it was
about counterfactuals i realized that
david deutsch was following in a long
line
of philosophers and others who had tried
to understand
the nature of counterfactuals
counterfactuals
being about what could have been the
case
what might have happened but didn't and
in physics in constructor theory in
in david deutscher's new theory and cara
maletto's new theory
what we're talking about is the
physical possibility of things that
could have happened but perhaps did not
happen
and we're going to sharpen that up as we
go along but i
i first encountered the significance or
the mystery behind counterfactuals
when i was at university of the
university of new south wales
a lecturer of mine who's still there a
lecturer of philosophical logic his name
is michaelis michael
and one of his great heroes was david
lewis
david lewis an american philosopher
and he wrote a book called
counterfactuals
so it's a philosophical exploration of
trying to understand the logic behind
how to understand counterfactuals now
i've had
the science of canon cart for a few
weeks now
i managed to get an advanced copy and i
read through it
and i realized there was no contact
there with david lewis
and so i asked hira about this and
there's good reason for that there's a
very good reason for that
that they want to clarify
counterfactuals
in terms of the physics i want to get
bogged down in
philosophical debates about who else
said
what when and where instead we're going
to get a clean
new approach to what counterfactuals are
about
from a physical perspective and so yes
you can go out and you can find other
books
that are about counterfactuals in
particular a book called counterfactuals
by david lewis which is
uh wonderful book a wonderful
philosophical exploration
but what we would now say what we would
have to now say i think what we would
have to conclude
is that there is a better approach to
these things
so reading that book i guess would be
something like
learning about newtonian physics it
could be useful and
interesting and illuminating but at the
same time
if you want the new stuff if you want
the quantum computation
of counterfactuals you literally want
the science of canon can't so
i am not going to despite the fact i did
um
i grabbed my uni notes about um modal
logic
and counterfactuals and the work of
people like saul kripke as well as david
lewis on this sort of stuff
just to compare it but i quickly
realized well
the science of cannon cat constructive
theory
the new physics of counterfactuals is
a much cleaner better way to go
because it's not utterly disconnected
from all these other subject areas which
is sometimes what
philosophy can tend to be because after
all
uh david lewis for example who who wrote
that book and and who consider he also
talked about
the you know the the reality of
logically
of of other possible worlds the
logically possible other worlds and this
is how he was trying to make sense of
counterfactuals
it didn't seem as though he was aware of
avenues into reality to physical reality
namely the everett interpretation of
quantum theory
that would have allowed him to really
solidify
and to understand more deeply what these
words essentially amounted to given what
we know about physical reality
okay so after that additional preamble
from kiara and myself let's begin
with chapter one which is titled
such stuff as dreams are made on
and there's a little introduction and
chiara writes
where i explain how to look at the laws
of physics in a far broader way
including counterfactuals statements
about what transformations are possible
or impossible
and you become acquainted with knowledge
defined objectively
via counterfactuals as information that
is capable of perpetuating
its own existence pausing there
and my reflection echoes there clearly
of the
sentiments in the beginning infinity one
particular way of understanding
what knowledge is knowledge is this
special entity
in the universe that tends to cause
itself
to remain in existence and we used to
say ten
that once instantiated tends to cause
itself to remain so
and i guess instantiated is a a bit of a
complicated word say
here we're saying perpetuating its own
existence means the same thing
let's get into the meat of the matter
the beginning of chapter one kiara
writes
quote most things in our universe are
impermanent
rocks are inexorably abraded away the
pages of books tear and turn yellow
living things from bacteria to elephants
to humans
age and die notable exceptions are the
elementary constituents of matter such
as electrons quarks and other
fundamental particles
while the systems they constitute do
change those elementary constituents
stay unchanged entirely responsible for
both the
permanence and the impermanence are the
laws of physics
they put formidable constraints on
everything in our universe
on all that has occurred so far and all
that will occur in the future
the laws of physics decree how planets
move in their orbits they govern the
expansion of the universe
the electric currents in our brains and
in our computers
they also control the inner workings of
a bacterium or a virus
the clouds in the sky the waves in the
ocean the fluid molten rock and the
glowing interior of our planet
their dominion extends even to beyond
what actually happens in the universe
to encompass what can and cannot
be made to happen whatever the laws of
physics forbid
cannot be brought about no matter how
hard one tries to realize it
no machine can be built that would cause
a particle to go faster than the speed
of light for instance
nor as i have mentioned could one build
a perpetual motion machine
creating energy out of no energy because
the laws of physics say
that the total energy of the universe is
conserved
the laws of physics are the primary
explanation for that natural tendency
for things to be
impermanent the reason for impermanence
is that the laws of physics are not
especially suited for preserving things
other than elementary components they
apply to the primitive constituents of
mata
without being specially crafted or
designed to preserve
certain special aggregates of them
electrons and protons attract each other
it is a fundamental interaction this
simple fact is the foundation of the
complex chemistry of our body
but no trace of that complexity is to be
found at the laws of physics
pausing there my reflection already
we have something new astonishing a
different
way of picturing what i have who
understood the
second law of thermodynamics to be about
this is already giving us an insight
into where this book is going to go
a different approach to physics
altogether the second law of
thermodynamics is about
entropy and in in simple language it's
about
no process is perfect things degrade
over time
nothing remains permanent except the
elementary components of
physical reality so except for
electrons and quarks for example now why
why should that be the case well here
we're getting a hint
because the laws of physics apply to the
primitive constituents of matter
without being specially crafted or
designed to preserve certain aspects
certain special aggregates of them so
the
aggregates the the thing that you get
when you put
these constituents these these
fundamental constituents
fundamental as far as we know the
electrons and the quarks for example
uh putting those things together in
complicated ways
creates an aggregate cats and tables and
people
and stars those things don't appear in
the laws of physics
there's no tables and laws of physics
but tables
exist in our universe nevertheless the
same is true for cats
same is true even for simple objects out
there in space far more numerous than
any of those things that i've just
mentioned
stars they don't appear in the laws of
physics but
the fundamental particles do in the
standard model
they do appear in the laws of physics so
therefore the laws of physics are
telling you what exists over time
and so that that is why those things
exist over time
and other things do not now can we go
deeper than that
can we get beneath these laws of physics
to say why
why would it be the case that some
things will just continue
and some things won't that is going to
be one of the motivations
for constructive theory so and and this
idea this idea that
no trace of complexity is to be found in
the laws of physics even though there is
complexity in the universe
is just such a deep mystery so let's
continue with the book
kyara writes laws of physics such as
those
of our universe that are not specially
designed
or tailored to preserve anything in
particular
aside from that elementary stuff i shall
call
no design laws under no design laws
complex aggregates of atoms such as
rocks are constantly modified by the
interactions with their surroundings
causing continuous small changes in
their structure
pausing there so let's just recap that
is this is an important given a new
theory
we're going to have some important ways
of
sharpening up nomenclature sharpening up
the fundamentals of the theory which
allow us to then go forth and to
make predictions uh the testable
testable about
this new theory and one such thing is
this
concept of no design laws so let me just
emphasize that again
kyara writes laws of physics such as
those of our universe that are not
specially designed or tailored
to preserve anything in particular aside
from elementary staff
i shall call no design laws so what's a
no design law it's a law
that doesn't have any special place
in it for the things that emerge out of
that elementary stuff
the elementary stuff might be specified
within the no design law
but there's nothing in those laws that
suggest
a design even though we have appearance
of design it doesn't seem as though
within the laws of physics anywhere at
all do we find
life do we find humans do we find
anything more complicated than the
basic constituents of mata okay those
fundamental particles including the the
force carriers which are fundamental
particles as well
so this really is a
new scientific theory and in in in an
earlier part of the book
uh which i did not read in in the the
fairly extensive preface
cara says we're going to meet new beasts
along the way
new beasts along the way so new things
that new ways
of conceiving of stuff that we haven't
before and i think this is one of the
first this concept of a
no design law so chiara has just
written under no design laws complex
aggregates of atoms
such as rocks are constantly modified by
the interactions with their surroundings
causing continuous small changes in
their structure
and then she goes on quote from the
point of view of preserving the
structure most of these interactions
introduce
errors in the form of small glitches
causing any complex structure
to be corrupted over time unless
something intervenes to prevent and
correct those errors
the structure will eventually fade away
or collapse
the more complex and different from
elementary stuff a system is
the harder it is to counteract errors
and keep it in existence
okay just pausing there again here we
already see
how constructor theory is drawing
inspiration from the theory of
computation
that to some extent there's this idea of
degradation in the physical world and
the idea of
error correction in computation so here
there's already the hint
of marrying these concepts together
let's continue
the more complex and different from
elementary staff a system is
the harder it is to counteract errors
and keep it in existence
think of the ancient practice of
preserving manuscripts by hand copying
them
the longer and more complex the
manuscript the higher the chance that
some error may be performed while
copying
and the harder it is for the scribe to
counteract errors
for instance by double checking each
word after having written it
given that the laws of physics are no
design the capacity of a system
to maintain itself in existence in an
otherwise changing environment
is a rare noteworthy property of our
universe
because it is so important i shall give
it a name resilience
that resilience is hard to come by has
long been considered a cruel fact of
nature
about which many poets and writers have
expressed their resigned disappointment
here is a magisterial example from a
speech
by prospero in shakespeare's tempest
and shakespeare wrote our revels now are
ended
these are our actors as i foretold you
we're all spirits
and are melted into air into thin air
and like the baseless fabric of this
vision the cloud-capped
towers the gorgeous palaces the solemn
temples the great globe itself
yea all which it inherits shall dissolve
and
like this insubstantial pageant faded
leave not a rack behind
we are such stuff as dreams are made on
and our little life
is rounded with a sleep and
quote from tempest now those lines have
such a delightful form and rhythm that
on first reading something important may
go unnoticed
they present only a narrow one-sided
view of reality which neglects
fundamental facts about it
if we take these other facts into
consideration we see that prospero's
pessimistic tone and conclusion
are misplaced but those facts are not
immediately evident
in order to see them we need to
contemplate something more than what
spontaneously happens in our universe
such as impermanence occasional
resilience planets in the cloud-capped
towers of our cities
we shall have to consider what can and
cannot
be made to happen the counterfactuals
which
too as i said are ultimately decided
by the laws of physics okay now uh
pausing that now i think it behooves me
to go back
and to actually read shakespeare there
there is a reason why
people study shakespeare as well as
just enjoy it and the reason is that it
can be complicated
and so now here is my imperfect
attempt to translate part of this
so shakespeare wrote our revels are now
ended
we're all spirits and are melted into
air into thin air
the cloud-capped towers the gorgeous
palaces the solemn temples the great
globe itself yay which we all inherit
shall dissolve
so what's he talking about there
impermanence everything there our revels
are now ended so
this thing is ending um
things melt into air into thin air so it
sounds very grim
doesn't it uh even our solemn temple the
great globe itself the entire
planet so it's interesting that he uh
kind of got that
that everything goes the way of the
second law everything degrades
everything is subject
to entropy we are such stuff as
dreams are made on and our little life
is rounded with a sleep so
rounded with the sleep there's nothing
before or at least
we begin as babies sleeping and we end
as people dying sleeping um
all very depressing and kiara's going to
cheer us up kiara writes quote
the most important element that
prospero's speech neglects is that even
under no design laws
resilience can be achieved
there is no guarantee that it shall be
achieved since the laws are not designed
for that but it can be achieved
because the laws of physics do not
forbid that
an immediate way to see this is to look
around a bit more carefully
than was possible in shakespeare's time
there are indeed entities that are
resilient to some degree
even more importantly some are more
resilient than others
some of them very much more these are
not
contrary to what proverbs and
conventional wisdom might suggest
are rocks and stones but living entities
pause there my reflection wow this is
thrilling already
thrilling already we are we think
we look out uh at at landscapes like
i'll put a landscape up and we think
that
you know there's stone structures like
this have just been there forever
and australia in particular is an
extremely old continent you know we're
talking
billions of years there are rocks there
that exist in western australia for
example
that the geologists have found that have
been there that have got that have got
minerals in them that were there
uh not that long after the planet itself
formed they seem to be resilient but
there are things
that rival that kind of thing and
ultimately
will far out strip any kind of mineral
or rock or anything that seems to be
robust
and that thing is life and we think to
ourselves no hold on life
degrades much more quickly than those
things any individual organism
uh dies very very quickly on geological
time scales
let's see what kiara has to say about
this let's keep going
and she writes quote living things in
general stand out
as having a much greater aptitude to
resilience
than things like rocks an animal that is
injured
can often repair itself whereas a rock
cannot an individual animal will
ultimately die
but its species may survive for much
longer than a rock can
consider bacteria for example they have
remained almost unchanged on earth
for more than 3 billion years while also
evolving
more precisely what has remained almost
unchanged
are some of the particular sequences of
instructions that code for how to
generate a bacterium
out of elementary components which are
present in every bacterial cell
a recipe that recipe is embodied in a
dna molecule
which is the core part of any cell it is
a string of chemicals
of four different kinds the string works
exactly like a long sequence of words
composed of an alphabet of four letters
each word corresponds roughly to an
instruction in the recipe
groups of these elementary instructions
are called genes by biologists
pausing there my reflection so this is
just astonishing
interesting new a new way of looking at
things that there are aspects of biology
that have remained in existence far
longer than almost all rocks
indeed i would say all rocks there might
be some minerals out there
that exist for longer and i suppose in a
sense you can kind of think of
dna as like a mineral not really okay
there are
technical differences if you speak to a
chemist but in both cases it's just an
arrangement of atoms right
that are sticking together but the thing
with
something like dna is it's not just a
mineral like a zircon every dna strand
is different to another dna strand
and it contains information and some of
that information is the same
consistent across dna strands for
example
bacteria which have been around well
soon after the late heavy
bombardment in astronomical terms here
on earth
dna did appear and
some of those dna strands have been
replicated for the last
three and a half billion years something
like that through to today
in certain bacteria or archaea even
these these
these thermophilic bacteria now for the
first time
i'm going to be skipping a fair bit of
this chapter
which talks about the significance of
the fact that dna contains this
resilient
information and i'll skip to the part
where
kara writes of course the resilience of
our civilization is constantly
threatened by severe problems
which crop up as we try to move forward
some of them such as global warming and
fast spreading pandemics
are in fact a byproduct the very
progress i have described
these problems present considerable
challenges and could easily wipe out
several
aspects of the progress we have made but
the point i would like to focus on here
is
it is possible to take steps to solve
those issues
no matter how serious they appear and
the laws of physics do not forbid
still greater improvement they do not
guarantee improvement or resolution
but nor do they forbid it resilience and
further progress
by addressing the problems such as the
climate crisis are both possible
the laws of physics expressed as
counterfactuals
offer a chance for improvement pausing
there so this is introducing
optimism optimism into the laws of
physics as well
we had this to some extent
in the beginning of infinity we had it
as
a description of how reality might
operate but here we're trying to sharpen
things up and it appears as though
with constructor theory we're getting a
more rigorous way of tying these things
together
optimism epistemology of certain kinds
physics biology and computation
okay skipping a little more and going
back to the book
and chiara writes these reflections
suggest
that the recipe in certain dna patterns
is much more resilient than stone
and that the elements of our
civilization for which there exists an
analogous recipe
such as medicine science and literature
can be more resilient still
so under no design laws a higher degree
of resilience
seems to require there to be recipes of
a particular kind
what kind and what are such recipes made
of exactly
the answer has to be constructed
gradually and requires a digression
about recipes
first let's understand how recipes can
be created under no design laws of
physics
after all as i said the only thing that
these laws preserve
for free are certain elementary
particles and chemicals
one therefore has to understand how
those recipes
have come about at all out of elementary
things that know nothing about recipes
of such complexity
i shall start with the recipes coded in
the pattern of living cells dna
it is now well understood how those have
come about darwin's theory of evolution
explains how living entities and their
stupendous biological adaptations
such as the snout of the dog the fins of
a dolphin or the wings of a bee
have come about in the absence of a
designer under no design physical laws
now each biological adaptation of a
given animal is coded for somewhere in
the recipe
embodied in the dna of that animal what
darwin's theory tells us
is how the recipes coding for complex
biological adaptations
can have come about without being
explicitly
designed this will be key to
understanding
what the recipes are made of as is often
the case with deep theories
grasping exactly what problem darwin's
theory addresses
require some excavation the problem was
stated with great clarity by their
theologian
william paley a few decades before
darwin's breakthrough
living things are so perfectly
orchestrated that they seem to have been
the output of an actual design process
such as that which produces a car in a
factory directed towards a purpose
they have the appearance of design
just like cars or smartphones or a watch
if you're walking along the beach and
you suddenly see a watch on the ground
you may be guessing that some designer
must have assembled it
but at the dawn of our planet's history
there was no designer
factory or intentional design process
that could create living things
only elementary components of matter
served in the form of an amorphous
bubbling
soup and nothing more so how can living
entities
and the resilient recipes coding for the
biological adaptations in their
structure
have come about in the absence of a
designer what darwin discovered
and what paley could not quite see is
that there is no need for any
intentional design process
biological adaptations in animals can be
created out of elementary components of
matter such as simple chemicals
via a non-purposeful process called
natural selection
that process needs only enough time and
elementary resources such as simple
chemicals and so on
it is an undirected mechanism and yet it
can produce
purposeful complexity starting from
scratch under
laws of physics that are simple and no
design themselves
now at this point chiara goes into an
explanation of evolution by natural
selection
via the neo-darwinian framework
which was uh best explained by richard
dawkins in the selfish gene
and so this idea of a replicator
that allows for genes genetic
information
knowledge to be passed from one
generation to the next is explained here
and i'm skipping all that and she does
make the point of course that
during this process this transcription
process where
the dna can be replicated where genes
can be replicated
there is an error correction mechanism
so there's error correcting there
at the core of how the transcription
works if there was no error correction
then there would be no replication but
the error correction isn't
perfect and so therefore you can have
errors creeping which leads to mutations
which leads to
genes which can be more or less fit for
particular environments and this is the
way in which of course
you end up getting selection pressure
and something some variant surviving
being more fit given a particular
environment and some being less fit
given a particular environment
for more on that buy the book or of
course by the beginning of infinity or
you could go back and read or listen to
the chapters about artificial creativity
and creativity that appear in the
beginning of infinity that
i read through in my own series now this
idea of um
some genes being more fit um when you
have a
mutation you will produce a a genetic
variant that
you know uh nine ninety nine times out
of 100 999 times out of a thousand
or more uh the chance is that it's not
going to be
better for the organism this particular
gene it's not going to be more fit but
sometimes it will be very rarely
it will be and chiara on this point
basically says
quote what distinguishes helpful changes
in the recipe the genetic recipe
for an ump from unhelpful ones it is a
particular kind of information
information that is
capable of keeping itself instantiated
in physical systems
it is resilient information i shall call
this
resilient information which is the
ingredient in successful recipes
knowledge and i shall talk about it
extensively in chapter five
for adaptations it is knowledge of some
features of the environment
and so an explanation there about what
biological knowledge is
knowledge which is in the genes
which keeps itself instantiated in
physical systems namely in the gna of
course
the dna of course and it's not this
knowledge is knowledge of how to keep
the organism or in fact
more specifically the gene in existence
over time so i'm going to skip past that
entire section
largely speaking on biology and yeah you
get the book for that to read that
i'm skipping two where chiaro writes
the other kind of recipe i mentioned
is those that maintain our civilization
in existence by coding for how to build
things
like palaces factories cars and robots
such recipes contain knowledge too they
consist of information that can
perpetuate itself
embodied in physical support such as our
brains
bits of paper books documentaries
historical records scientific papers
conference proceedings the internet and
so on
however this kind of knowledge is
brought about via a different process
than natural selection it is produced by
thinking
and it can reach further the knowledge
that emerges directly by natural
selection
it is primarily this kind of knowledge
that humans have been able to construct
their civilization
that is tentatively improving and
growing despite
also often making bad mistakes such
knowledge
consists of thoughts it is made of the
same stuff
as dreams are made on yet rather than
fading away like fog in the morning sun
as prospero suggests knowledge is the
key
to resilience the knowledge in his
speech survives to this day
in fact knowledge is the most resilient
stuff that
can exist in our universe given that
knowledge has such an essential role in
the survival of complex entities
it is essential to understand the
process by which new knowledge is
created
from scratch in our mind fortunately
this process was elucidated by the
philosopher karl popper in the mid 20th
century
he argued that knowledge creation always
starts with a problem
which we can think of as a clash between
different ideas someone has about
reality
incidentally this suggests a rather
positive uplifting interpretation of
conflicting states of mind where
contrary
impulses clash and fight these conflicts
are all examples of problems
but luckily problems can lead to new
discoveries for example when writing a
story
the clash in the author's mind might be
between the desire to use
elegant a lyrical language and the
necessity of keeping the attention of
the reader alive with a gripping plot
the author has to find a way of meeting
both these criteria which may clash in
certain situations
a long passage describing an idyllic
landscape might give a perfect chance to
meet the former criterion but might
result in the reader dropping the book
and switching on the tv
because it slows down the pace of
storytelling to address problems such as
this
one has to create new knowledge first
one conjectures several tentative
solutions the analog of variations in
replicators in natural selection
these could take the form of actual
drafts written down on paper or thoughts
or a combination of those
those conjectures may well be full of
errors and produce even
worse results at first so one proceeds
with the second phase
criticism criticism is the act of
seeking and correcting errors in an
attempt to improve on the solutions
the analog of natural selection
sometimes this process may be completely
opaque to us
so that we may have the impression that
good ideas come out of the blue
but it does in fact take place the
author will usually discard most of the
earlier versions of the story
until some final product that meets both
criteria comes about
this final product if the process has
worked
may have the hallmark of all
masterpieces it is
hard to change further while still
meeting the criteria
because it has been obtained by
tentatively removing flaws
in previous versions which met the
criteria to a lesser extent
the masterpiece contains new knowledge
it
shall be remembered it shall be
translated into different languages
it shall live on for centuries and
survive for generations
inspiring readers of all ages as long as
civilization survives
as shakespeare's sonnet number 18 says
of itself
so long as men can breathe or eyes can
see
so long lives this and this gives life
to thee
that process is tentative given that
there is no design in the laws of
physics
there is no guarantee that one shall
make progress by conjecture and
criticism
but one can for the same reason a
solution that looks good for one problem
may be found to be inadequate at a later
stage for example in physics
newton's theory of gravitation had been
tremendously successful for nearly three
centuries at explaining planetary motion
and many other things but nevertheless
it was later found to be inadequate
and was superseded by a better theory
einstein's general relativity
pausing there my reflection so this is
a remarkable application of
the nascent physics of constructor
theory
to epistemology and in particular
to knowledge that tends to cause itself
to remain in place
and in particular you know great works
of literature or great works of music
where the masterpiece as we refer to
is a masterpiece precisely because
errors have been corrected
errors in light of a particular
criteria set of criterion
that the author the composer
is striving to meet it's that thing that
is said in armadales
about that mozart talking about mozart's
music
displace one note and there would be
diminishment
if you try and fiddle with the great
works of classical music even the great
works of pop music
then they tend to sound worse the
composer is
striving for something objectively good
and even if they cannot explain
precisely what it is
they're nonetheless meeting it okay it
might be inexplicit knowledge
when it comes to books you know one of
my favorite all-time
works of literature is tolkien's the
lord of the rings and many of us
love it precisely because of exactly how
kiara described
this clash that occurs in the mind of
the author
no doubt and some people some people do
find tolkien's work
slow in parts and this is precisely why
some of us
absolutely love it because it is this
wonderful
finely tuned blend
of a fast paced plot
interesting characters getting up to fun
stuff that's exciting and these long
poetic passages of prose
describing the countryside the scenery
and you feel like you're there if you
really take it on board and it's nice to
have that kind of experience with a book
and that's why it's so long of course
you know it has these very long passages
where you can sit back and
meditate and relax and and really
imagine that you're there and it really
does inspire
uh one's imagination you can visualize
you know the
the forests and the mountains leap into
existence because of these long
passages where tolkien being just an
absolute master of the english language
is able to conjure these images in your
mind and then that's broken up with
the excitement of some sort of uh plot
thing going on with the characters where
they're being attacked by the baddies or
uh some other great uh battle goes on
and so tolkien clearly was did have that
clash in his mind at times no doubt no
doubt he
probably thought to himself this is
going on a bit long or he's thinking
well
now i'm just engaged in a in authoring a
blockbuster fairy tale which is what he
never wanted to do but
they're kind of exciting there's
something fun and exciting happening on
every page but that doesn't happen in
lord of the rings so it is a
masterpiece because of this at least
some of us would say it's a masterpiece
because of this
so too of course with with shakespeare's
work or with any of the great
poets and playwrights you know you it's
difficult to improve
okay not to say it's an impossible in
principle to improve
but very difficult hard to vary which is
what
makes it good that's the thing that's
one of the things that make it good
okay it's hard to vary while still
achieving what you want it to achieve
in the case of lord of the rings being
an absolutely engaging
entertaining thrilling read
an impressive read okay let's go back to
the book
and chiara writes there are no absolute
sources
of certain truth any good solution to a
problem
may also contain errors this principle
is based on fallibilism
a pillar of popper's explanation of
rational thinking fallablism
makes progress feasible because it
allows for further criticism to occur in
the future
even when at present we seem to be
content with whatever solution we have
found
it leaves space for creating ever
improving theories
stories works of art and music it also
tells us that errors are extremely
interesting things to look for
whenever we try to make progress we
should hope to find more of them
as fast as possible now i'm going to do
something that i
haven't done with my other series on the
beginning of infinity
but i'll do it here for this episode and
i'm going to skip
a an extensive number of pages probably
about 20 pages or so
because it's largely about physics which
is the area i'm
most interested in probably alongside of
epistemology and there's a lot of
epistemology there as well
and so i want to devote a separate
episode
my next episode to that part of this
first chapter
i want to end today's episode however
with something that comes later
which really i think very clearly
illuminates the centrality importance
of this concept of counterfactuals and
how physics hasn't really dealt with
counterfactuals before but constructive
theory
offers a new lens into understanding
reality scientifically and so i'm going
to read
um the story that kiara
tells from ancient greek myth this is
still in chapter one
and kiara writes consider as another
example
a simple story one that could be told
from generation to generation by oral
tradition without having to be written
down
an ancient greek myth will do the story
goes that
theseus son of aegis king of athens
went to crete to kill the minotaur
theseus made an agreement with his aged
father
that if he defeated the minotaur on
their return his crew
would raise white sails on the ship had
he perished
his crew would raise black sails
so off went theseus and he defeated the
minotaur but on his way back
distracted by all sorts of things
including possibly the presence of his
fiancee
ariadne on on the ship
he forgot to tell the crew about the
sails
the crew left the black sails on and a
gears
seeing the ship approaching from the
highest tower of athens
thought his son was dead so he threw
himself into the sea and drowned
this tragic story is why the sea
is now called the aegean now suppose we
asked
a master storyteller to tell that story
with the constraint that he could
formulate statements
only about what happens that is
he must report the full story without
ever referring to counterfactual
properties
in particular he cannot refer to
properties that have to do with what
could or could not be done to physical
systems
this task turns out to be impossible for
the story to make sense
and to convey its full meaning two
attributes of the ship are essential
one that can be used to send a signal
by assuming one of two states white sale
showing or black sale showing the other
that the state of having black or white
sales
can be copied onto another physical
system such as aegis
eyes and brain the copyability property
tells us that the flag contains
information just as in the case of
replicators
these two properties just like the
property of blank paper are
counterfactual
so that myth could not be told conveying
its full meaning
under the constraint that one should
refer only to what happens
not even by the best storyteller ever
pause there
my reflection ending the reading for
today
of the science of canon can't what a
wonderful
way to um bring myth
into this whole thing and to bring
storytelling into this thing because i
think that gets across
the whole point of this hitherto physics
has been about dynamical laws
where you plug in and i'll do an example
next time where you plug in
the conditions initial conditions
they're often called but they can be
conditions at any particular time which
will allow you to then do a prediction
of what will happen and this has always
been the story of physics
here we're going to predict what will
happen or
in certain modes of quantum theory um
what probably will happen something like
that okay and in bayesianism of course
you get this whole idea of what probably
will happen
but in other areas like storytelling for
example it makes no sense at all to just
talk about what will happen
we want to know what could possibly have
happened the only way that story makes
sense the only way we know why the king
throws himself into the ocean why the
sea is now called the aegean
is because his his son was flying black
sails
if he had have been flying white sails
as he should have been if he had have
defeated the minotaur
then the sea would not have been called
the eugene because the
king would never have flung himself into
the sea killing himself
now this makes sense of the story
this makes sense of the story in
literature how much more so then
can it make sense of what physically is
going
on in reality in physical reality
this is why this new mode of explanation
in physics is just so exciting
this is at the crux of it that hitherto
we've been given this
tiny little slice of reality through
the lens of physics powerful as it is
useful it is and i'll talk about all the
ways in which it's
so useful and powerful next time via the
book
but it is a tiny sliver of the
possibilities
that give you the much more grand
picture
of what reality is about and hopefully
into the future as constructive theory
unfolds and we learn more about it
of our uh researchers working in this
area
we we begin to flesh out we've been to
color in the lines
about what constructor theory is telling
us about physical reality
but for now at least we have the stage
set
that we are pivoting away from
this single line idea of physics tells
us what
is going to happen what has happened and
what is going to happen
the constructor theory moving beyond the
dynamical laws
can now explain what possibly
could happen and that what possibly
could happen
indeed comes down in part to what we
choose to create knowledge about
because then that allows physical
possibilities to occur
in the future and we people
are instrumental in that central to that
whole conception
so i'm excited about this series go and
get the book
it's a great book this is my only second
reading of it so i'm still
learning new things about it as i
as i go through and look out also for
an episode about the fabric of reality
released
near to this one probably a short one
but near to this one
okay until next time bye
[Music]
you